For a Graduate course, principles of bioinformatics, i am doing a project 'Gene Expression Analysis of Drug-Resistant vs. Susceptible E. coli Strains'
The central hypothesis is that antibiotic resistance in E. coli is driven by differential expression
of specific genes and pathways, especially those involved in stress response, drug efflux, and
cell wall synthesis. By identifying these differentially expressed genes and pathways, we can
better understand mechanisms of resistance and identify potential therapeutic targets.
The data for this project is obtained from the NCBI GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) database (Accession ID: GSE59408).
This data is published in the paper: Prediction of antibiotic resistance by gene expression profiles.
The exact methods of collecting the data and processing it are provided in the paper as below:
Bacterial strain and culture conditions
The IS elements-free Escherichia coli strain MDS42 (ref. 49) was purchased from Scarab Genomics and used throughout this study. Bacterial cells were cultured in 200 μl modified M9 medium50 in 96-well microplates (Corning Inc. 3595) with shaking at 900 strokes per minute on a microplate shaker (TITRAMAX1000, Heidolph Instruments) at 34 °C. All the antibiotics used in this study were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. Antibiotic stock solutions were made by dissolving powder stocks in specified solvents by the manufacturer’s instruction. All antibiotic stocks dissolved in water were 0.2 μm filter-sterilized and stored at −80 °C before use.

Experimental evolution of antibiotic resistance
Four independent cultures for each antibiotic were propagated in parallel with serial diluted antibiotics that were slightly lower than MICs. The range of antibiotic concentrations used for the evolution experiments were in doubling dilution steps up and down from 1 μg ml−1 with three quartile concentrations according to the MICs of each evolving culture line. At a daily transfer, cell growth was monitored by measuring the OD600 nm of each well using the microplate reader 1420 ARVO (PerkinElmer Inc.). We defined a well whose OD600 nm was >0.03 as a well in which cells could grow. Cells calculated to yield an initial OD600 nm of 3 × 10−5 were transferred from the well with the highest drug concentration in which cells could grow to new plates with fresh medium and various concentrations of antibiotics. Cells during and after the evolution experiments were stored as glycerol stocks at −80 °C and used for further analysis.
MIC measurement
Serial dilutions of each antibiotic were made in 96-well microplates using modified M9 medium and stored at −80 °C before use. The range of antibiotic concentrations used for determining MICs were based on doubling dilution steps up and down from 1 μg ml−1 as required depending on the antibiotic. We prepared precultures by shaking glycerol-stocked strains in 200 μl of modified M9 medium in 96-well microplates for 23 h at 34 °C with (evolved resistant strains) or without (parent strain) the antibiotics used for the evolution experiments. The precultured cells, calculated to yield an initial OD600 nm of 3 × 10−5, were inoculated into each well in freshly thawed MIC plates to a final volume of 200 μl. After 23 h incubation with shaking, the microplates were read at 600 nm using 1420 ARVO (PerkinElmer). The MICs were defined as the lowest concentration of antibiotic that reduced the growth to an OD600 nm<0.03.
Total RNA isolation
We prepared precultures by shaking −80 °C glycerol-stocked parent and evolved resistant strains in 200 μl of modified M9 medium in 96-well microplates for 23 h at 34 °C without antibiotic. The cells precultured were diluted to an OD600 nm of 1 × 10−4 into 200 μl of fresh modified M9 medium in 96-well microplates. Then, cultures were grown with shaking at 34 °C to an OD600 nm in the 0.072–0.135 range (equivalent of 10 generations). One hundred and eighty microlitres of exponential cultures were withdrawn rapidly, and cells were killed immediately by the addition of an equal volume of ice-cold ethanol that contained 10% (w/v) phenol. The cells were collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 5 min, and the pelleted cells were stored at −80 °C before RNA extraction. Total RNA was isolated and purified from cells using an RNeasy micro Kit with on-column DNA digestion (Qiagen) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The quantity of the purified RNA was determined by the absorbance at 260 nm using NanoDrop ND-2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The quality of the purified RNA was evaluated using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with an RNA 6000 Nano Kit (Agilent Technologies). Because the quality of the purified RNA was important for accurate estimation of the gene expression level, two to three independent purifications and qualifications of total RNA were performed for each condition. We utilized only purified RNAs that had an RIN (RNA integrity number) of 9.0 or more. The purified RNAs were stored at −80 °C before transcriptome analysis.
Expression profiling of genes by microarray experiments
Microarray experiments were performed using the custom-designed Agilent 8 × 60 K array for E. coli W3110, in which 12 probes were prepared for each gene. One hundred nanograms of purified total RNAs were labelled using the Low Input Quick Amp WT Labeling Kit (Agilent Technologies) with Cyanine3 (Cy3) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. After confirmation of yields (>825 ng) and specific activities (>15 pmol μg−1) of the Cy3-labelled cRNAs using NanoDrop ND-2000, labelled cRNAs (600 ng) were fragmented and then hybridized on the microarray for 17 h while rotating at a speed of 10 r.p.m. at 65 °C in an hybridization oven (Agilent Technologies). Washing and scanning of microarrays were performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Microarray image analysis was performed using Feature Extraction version 10.7.3.1 (Agilent Technologies). The background corrected intensity values were normalized using the quantile normalization method. The normalized data of microarrays have been deposited in GEO under the accession code GSE59408 and are presented in Supplementary Data 1. In that table, we also present the biological duplicated data of the parent strain, that is, expression data obtained from different cultures of the parent strain. Comparisons of the biological duplication data demonstrated that 99% of the expression ratios were within the range 1/1.35 to 1.35.
The paper also delves into additional methods such as Genome data preparation, Genome sequence analyses using high-throughput sequencers etc, which I think are not relevant for my project.
I have downloaded the series matrix file which seems to contain the actual data. There are 4470 rows of genes and 43 columns:
1st column is the ID_REF which is the gene identifier column.
2nd and 3rd column are Parent strain_rep1 and Parent strain_rep2 which would be the susceptible columns, and the remaining 40 columns are 10 antibiotic reistant columns with 4 lines each. They are as below:
Cefoperazone (CPZ) resistant strain_Line1, Cefoperazone (CPZ) resistant strain_Line2, Cefoperazone (CPZ) resistant strain_Line3, Cefoperazone (CPZ) resistant strain_Line4, Cefixime (CFIX) resistant strain_Line1, Cefixime (CFIX) resistant strain_Line2, Cefixime (CFIX) resistant strain_Line3, Cefixime (CFIX) resistant strain_Line4, Amikacin (AMK) resistant strain_Line1, Amikacin (AMK) resistant strain_Line2, Amikacin (AMK) resistant strain_Line3, Amikacin (AMK) resistant strain_Line4, Neomycin (NM) resistant strain_Line1, Neomycin (NM) resistant strain_Line2, Neomycin (NM) resistant strain_Line3, Neomycin (NM) resistant strain_Line4, Doxycycline (DOXY) resistant strain_Line1, Doxycycline (DOXY) resistant strain_Line2, Doxycycline (DOXY) resistant strain_Line3, Doxycycline (DOXY) resistant strain_Line4, Chloramphenicol (CP) resistant strain_Line1, Chloramphenicol (CP) resistant strain_Line2, Chloramphenicol (CP) resistant strain_Line3, Chloramphenicol (CP) resistant strain_Line4, Azithromycin (AZM) resistant strain_Line1, Azithromycin (AZM) resistant strain_Line2, Azithromycin (AZM) resistant strain_Line3, Azithromycin (AZM) resistant strain_Line4, Trimethoprim (TP) resistant strain_Line1, Trimethoprim (TP) resistant strain_Line2, Trimethoprim (TP) resistant strain_Line3, Trimethoprim (TP) resistant strain_Line4, Enoxacin (ENX) resistant strain_Line1, Enoxacin (ENX) resistant strain_Line2, Enoxacin (ENX) resistant strain_Line3, Enoxacin (ENX) resistant strain_Line4, Ciprofloxacin (CPFX) resistant strain_Line1, Ciprofloxacin (CPFX) resistant strain_Line2, Ciprofloxacin (CPFX) resistant strain_Line3, Ciprofloxacin (CPFX) resistant strain_Line4

I am planning to do entire project using R. The basic outline/methods I have planned as per my understanding are:
1. Data cleaning/preprocessing if required
2. Differential gene expression  (using tools like DESeq2, Tweedieverse, limma - which ever is more suitable for the data)
3. Clustering (if required)
4. Pathway analysis (if requried)